README.md, before:

# TileServer GL - OpenMapTiles Setup

Self-hosted tile server with OpenMapTiles styles, custom tile generation, and nginx caching proxy.

## Overview

This setup provides a complete self-hosted map tile server using:
- **TileServer GL** - Vector tile server with MapLibre GL rendering
- **OpenMapTiles** - Open-source map styles (OSM + OSM Bright)
- **Planetiler** - Fast OpenStreetMap tile generator
- **Nginx Caching Proxy** - High-performance tile cache with 7-day retention

## Architecture
```
Client Request
     ↓
Nginx Cache (Port 8081)
     ↓ (cache miss)
TileServer GL (Port 8080, localhost only)
     ↓
MBTiles Database
```

**Security:**
- TileServer GL is only accessible via localhost
- Nginx proxy validates requests and serves only raster tiles
- All other endpoints are blocked (404)

## Directory Structure
```
.
├── setup-styles.sh           # Install map styles and fonts
├── setup-tiles.sh            # Generate MBTiles from OSM data
├── docker-compose.yaml       # Container orchestration
├── nginx/
│   └── default.conf.template # Nginx cache configuration
├── data/
│   ├── config.json           # TileServer configuration
│   ├── fonts/                # Web fonts (Noto Sans, Roboto, etc.)
│   ├── styles/               # Map styles
│   │   ├── osm/              # OpenMapTiles default style
│   │   └── osm-bright/       # OSM Bright style
│   └── tiles/
│       └── tiles.mbtiles     # Vector tiles (generated)
└── build/                    # Build artifacts (git clones, etc.)
```

## Quick Start

### 1. Install Styles and Fonts

```bash
./setup-styles.sh
```

This script will:
- Clone OpenMapTiles and OSM Bright repositories
- Download and build fonts (Noto Sans, Roboto, Open Sans, etc.)
- Build sprite sheets
- Install styles to `data/styles/`
- Configure styles for local MBTiles usage

### 2. Generate Tiles

```bash
# Generate tiles for a specific region
./setup-tiles.sh germany

# Or use auto-detected settings
./setup-tiles.sh europe

# With custom thread count
./setup-tiles.sh germany 8
```

This script will:
- Install Java 21 JRE (if needed)
- Download latest Planetiler release
- Auto-detect optimal RAM and CPU settings
- Download OSM data for specified region
- Generate vector tiles in OpenMapTiles schema
- Deploy to `data/tiles/tiles.mbtiles`

**Available regions:** `germany`, `europe`, `north-america`, `planet`, etc.

See [Geofabrik](https://download.geofabrik.de/) for all available regions.

### 3. Start TileServer

```bash
docker compose up -d
```

Access your tile server at: `http://localhost:8080`

## API Endpoints

### Raster Tiles (via Nginx Cache)
```
GET /styles/{style}/{z}/{x}/{y}.png       # Standard resolution (256px)
GET /styles/{style}/{z}/{x}/{y}@2x.png    # Retina resolution (512px)
GET /styles/{style}/{z}/{x}/{y}@3x.png    # High-DPI resolution (768px)
```

**Available styles:** `osm`, `osm-bright`

**Cache behavior:**
- Successful tiles (200): Cached for 7 days
- Not found (404): Cached for 1 hour
- Other errors: Cached for 1 minute
- Cache header: `X-Cache-Status` (HIT/MISS/EXPIRED)

### All Other Endpoints

All requests outside the raster tile pattern return `404 Not Found`.

## Advanced Usage

### Custom Java Settings

```bash
# Set custom heap size for tile generation
JAVA_TOOL_OPTIONS="-Xms8G -Xmx8G" ./setup-tiles.sh germany
```

### Update Styles

```bash
# Re-run to get latest styles
./setup-styles.sh
docker compose down && docker compose up -d
```

### Regenerate Tiles for Different Region

```bash
# Switch from Germany to Europe
./setup-tiles.sh europe
docker compose down && docker compose up -d
```

**Note:** Old tiles are automatically replaced (no backup is created due to file size).

## Nginx Cache Configuration

The nginx caching proxy provides:
- **7-day tile caching** for optimal performance
- **CORS headers** enabled for cross-origin requests
- **Compression disabled** (PNG tiles are already compressed)
- **Cache locking** to prevent thundering herd
- **Stale cache serving** during backend errors
- **10GB max cache size** with automatic eviction

Cache is stored in a Docker volume and persists across container restarts.

## System Requirements

### Hardware

- **RAM:** Minimum 4GB, 8GB+ recommended for larger regions
- **Disk:** Varies by region
  - Germany: ~2-3 GB
  - Europe: ~20-30 GB
  - Planet: ~100+ GB
- **CPU:** Multi-core recommended (used during tile generation)

### Software Dependencies

Automatically installed by scripts:
- `git`
- `docker`
- `docker-compose-plugin`
- `jq`
- `sed`
- `make`
- `openjdk-21-jre`

## Available Styles

### OSM (OpenMapTiles Default)

Complete OpenMapTiles style with detailed rendering for all zoom levels and full feature coverage.

### OSM Bright

Clean, bright color scheme optimized for readability, based on the official OSM Bright style.

Both styles are pre-configured to use local MBTiles data and are accessible through the nginx cache.

### Performance issues

- Increase `max_size` in `nginx/default.conf.template` for larger cache
- Add more RAM to tile generation: `JAVA_TOOL_OPTIONS="-Xmx16G"`
- Use faster storage

## Resources

- [TileServer GL Documentation](https://tileserver.readthedocs.io/)
- [OpenMapTiles](https://openmaptiles.org/)
- [Planetiler](https://github.com/onthegomap/planetiler)
- [Geofabrik Downloads](https://download.geofabrik.de/)
- [Nginx Caching Guide](https://nginx.org/en/docs/http/ngx_http_proxy_module.html#proxy_cache)

## License

This setup uses open-source components:
- TileServer GL - BSD 2-Clause License
- OpenMapTiles - BSD 3-Clause License
- Planetiler - Apache License 2.0
- Nginx - BSD 2-Clause License
- Map data © OpenStreetMap contributors - Open Data Commons Open Database License (ODbL)

Commit message:

Optimized planet tile generation for lower RAM usage

README.md, after:

# TileServer GL - OpenMapTiles Setup

Self-hosted tile server with OpenMapTiles styles, custom tile generation, and nginx caching proxy.

## Overview

This setup provides a complete self-hosted map tile server using:
- **TileServer GL** - Vector tile server with MapLibre GL rendering
- **OpenMapTiles** - Open-source map styles (OSM + OSM Bright)
- **Planetiler** - Fast OpenStreetMap tile generator
- **Nginx Caching Proxy** - High-performance tile cache with 7-day retention

## Architecture
```
Client Request
     ↓
Nginx Cache (Port 8081)
     ↓ (cache miss)
TileServer GL (Port 8080, localhost only)
     ↓
MBTiles Database
```

**Security:**
- TileServer GL is only accessible via localhost
- Nginx proxy validates requests and serves only raster tiles
- All other endpoints are blocked (404)

## Directory Structure
```
.
├── setup-styles.sh           # Install map styles and fonts
├── setup-tiles.sh            # Generate MBTiles from OSM data
├── docker-compose.yaml       # Container orchestration
├── nginx/
│   └── default.conf.template # Nginx cache configuration
├── data/
│   ├── config.json           # TileServer configuration
│   ├── fonts/                # Web fonts (Noto Sans, Roboto, etc.)
│   ├── styles/               # Map styles
│   │   ├── osm/              # OpenMapTiles default style
│   │   └── osm-bright/       # OSM Bright style
│   └── tiles/
│       └── tiles.mbtiles     # Vector tiles (generated)
└── build/                    # Build artifacts (git clones, etc.)
```

## Quick Start

### 1. Install Styles and Fonts

```bash
./setup-styles.sh
```

This script will:
- Clone OpenMapTiles and OSM Bright repositories
- Download and build fonts (Noto Sans, Roboto, Open Sans, etc.)
- Build sprite sheets
- Install styles to `data/styles/`
- Configure styles for local MBTiles usage

### 2. Generate Tiles

```bash
# Generate tiles for a specific region
./setup-tiles.sh germany

# Or use auto-detected settings
./setup-tiles.sh europe

# With custom thread count
./setup-tiles.sh germany 8

# To generate planet tiles, at least 32 GB of memory is required
./setup-tiles.sh planet
```

This script will:
- Install Java 21 JRE (if needed)
- Download latest Planetiler release
- Auto-detect optimal RAM and CPU settings
- Download OSM data for specified region
- Generate vector tiles in OpenMapTiles schema
- Deploy to `data/tiles/tiles.mbtiles`

**Available regions:** `germany`, `europe`, `north-america`, `planet`, etc.

See [Geofabrik](https://download.geofabrik.de/) for all available regions.

### 3. Start TileServer

```bash
docker compose up -d
```

Access your tile server at: `http://localhost:8080`

## API Endpoints

### Raster Tiles (via Nginx Cache)
```
GET /styles/{style}/{z}/{x}/{y}.png       # Standard resolution (256px)
GET /styles/{style}/{z}/{x}/{y}@2x.png    # Retina resolution (512px)
GET /styles/{style}/{z}/{x}/{y}@3x.png    # High-DPI resolution (768px)
```

**Available styles:** `osm`, `osm-bright`

**Cache behavior:**
- Successful tiles (200): Cached for 7 days
- Not found (404): Cached for 1 hour
- Other errors: Cached for 1 minute
- Cache header: `X-Cache-Status` (HIT/MISS/EXPIRED)

### All Other Endpoints

All requests outside the raster tile pattern return `404 Not Found`.

## Advanced Usage

### Custom Java Settings

```bash
# Set custom heap size for tile generation
JAVA_TOOL_OPTIONS="-Xms8G -Xmx8G" ./setup-tiles.sh germany
```

### Update Styles

```bash
# Re-run to get latest styles
./setup-styles.sh
docker compose down && docker compose up -d
```

### Regenerate Tiles for Different Region

```bash
# Switch from Germany to Europe
./setup-tiles.sh europe
docker compose down && docker compose up -d
```

**Note:** Old tiles are automatically replaced (no backup is created due to file size).

## Nginx Cache Configuration

The nginx caching proxy provides:
- **7-day tile caching** for optimal performance
- **CORS headers** enabled for cross-origin requests
- **Compression disabled** (PNG tiles are already compressed)
- **Cache locking** to prevent thundering herd
- **Stale cache serving** during backend errors
- **10GB max cache size** with automatic eviction

Cache is stored in a Docker volume and persists across container restarts.

## System Requirements

### Hardware

- **RAM:** Minimum 4GB, 8GB+ recommended for larger regions
- **Disk:** Varies by region
  - Germany: ~2-3 GB
  - Europe: ~20-30 GB
  - Planet: ~100+ GB
- **CPU:** Multi-core recommended (used during tile generation)

### Software Dependencies

Automatically installed by scripts:
- `git`
- `docker`
- `docker-compose-plugin`
- `jq`
- `sed`
- `make`
- `openjdk-21-jre`

## Available Styles

### OSM (OpenMapTiles Default)

Complete OpenMapTiles style with detailed rendering for all zoom levels and full feature coverage.

### OSM Bright

Clean, bright color scheme optimized for readability, based on the official OSM Bright style.

Both styles are pre-configured to use local MBTiles data and are accessible through the nginx cache.

### Performance issues

- Increase `max_size` in `nginx/default.conf.template` for larger cache
- Add more RAM to tile generation: `JAVA_TOOL_OPTIONS="-Xmx16G"`
- Use faster storage

## Resources

- [TileServer GL Documentation](https://tileserver.readthedocs.io/)
- [OpenMapTiles](https://openmaptiles.org/)
- [Planetiler](https://github.com/onthegomap/planetiler)
- [Geofabrik Downloads](https://download.geofabrik.de/)
- [Nginx Caching Guide](https://nginx.org/en/docs/http/ngx_http_proxy_module.html#proxy_cache)

## License

This setup uses open-source components:
- TileServer GL - BSD 2-Clause License
- OpenMapTiles - BSD 3-Clause License
- Planetiler - Apache License 2.0
- Nginx - BSD 2-Clause License
- Map data © OpenStreetMap contributors - Open Data Commons Open Database License (ODbL)
